Let's version your repositories like code!
We'll freeze a checkpoint,
give it a name,
then drop a real database table.
The rollback brings back the exact frozen
state,
every row included,
in seconds.
The model is git,
but for whole repositories.
A commit is a frozen,
immutable image.
It refuses to even mount,
so nothing can ever change it.
A branch is just a name pointing
at a commit.
And checkout turns any commit back into
a fresh,
writable fork.
Our working fork holds version one of the app
state — a simple marker file makes it visible.
Version one,
on disk.
It is not just files.
A real PostgreSQL database lives in this
fork too,
and the customers table holds three rows.
Remember that number.
Three rows.
That's the data we're about to put in
danger.
Freeze it.
The commit captures the entire repository as
an immutable image,
with a message,
an author,
and a parent.
Exactly like git,
but for everything,
database included.
Committed.
This snapshot can never change.
It refuses to even mount.
Give the commit a name.
The stable branch now points at version one.
A branch is a name you can come back to.
Keep working.
Version two replaces version one in the
working fork.
The commit does not care.
The working fork moved on.
The history did not.
Now the disaster.
The risky change drops the customers table.
In real life this is the moment
your stomach sinks.
Drop table ran.
The data is gone from the working fork.
Ask for the rows again and the
database says it straight:
relation customers does not exist.
The disaster is real.
Every row is gone.
Relation does not exist.
Three rows,
gone.
Commit the risky change too,
broken table and all.
History records what actually happened.
Two commits now,
parent and child.
Two snapshots in the chain.
And there is the history:
version two on top,
version one below it,
messages and authors included,
without unlocking a single image.
A repo log,
exactly like a git log.
Now the payoff.
Check the stable branch out into
a brand new writable fork.
Reflink clone:
near-instant,
any size.
A writable copy of the frozen version one,
in about a second.
Start the rollback fork like any other repo.
Two forks running:
today's version and the checkpoint.
And the proof:
the rollback fork reads version one.
The working fork still has version two.
History you can run.
Rollback complete.
Nothing was overwritten to get here.
And the part that matters most:
the dropped table is back,
all three rows of it.
The rollback restored the database,
not just the files.
Three rows again.
The disaster is undone.
Commits never change,
forks never wait.
Next up,
we move a whole running repository to
another machine,
live.
See you in the next one!